Wouldn't it be fucked up if there was a world where all people have a 0.001% chance of becoming immortal and the style of immortality is very similar to Ajin demi human where they are able to be trapped and stuff but without the powers and shadows and stuff. Anyway over time the small minority of immortals would slowly consolidate power as more and more are born and their population doesn't go down because they're immortal lol. At the point where the story starts the immortals have pretty much taken over the entire world and subjugate the normal people only for the purpose of creating more immortals. There is a bit of a flaw as just like in Ajin there is no way to tell if you are immortal without killing yourself because you don't have regen while you're alive. The immortals are infertile so they need mortals to be able to reproduce, but they can't test all newborn babies for immortality since the only way to do so is by killing them. Ignore the plot hole that you could just test for infertility somehow and then just kill the infertile ones to check for immortality since they would be useless anyway. The main character is secretly immortal and is trying to rebel against the immortals yada yada no clue how the fuck you would be able to fight against an entire society of immortal beings but I'm sure it would be cool as fuck to figure out. Like in Ajin it took the entire Japanese army to beat one immortal guy so trying guerilla warfare on immortal ppl would probably do nothing without incredible strategy. I guess it would make sense if most immortals had like no combat experience and relied on a sect of skilled guards to keep the rest of society in line. So trained humans vs the average immortal would maybe be even if there was an easy way to incapacitate or maybe somehow kill them/put them in comas semi-permanently. Like in Ajin they put them in barrels lol. Also this is a no magic verse, all technology and everything is still the same except for the immortal thing. Actually technology would probably be advanced because of immortal scientists living forever and being able to experiment more effectively. Anyway whatever it would be cool.