- Issue is whether restricting strata apartments to long-term rentals only constitutes constructive expropriation
- *Mariner Real Estate* held that restrictive regulation of property is ordinary in Canada, to prove constructive expropriation, all reasonable private uses must be restricted
- These apartments can still be rented long term
- However, the regulating authority (the province) does get a clear benefit, but not a property interest
- After *Annapolis Group v Halifax*, the test for the benefit element does extend to this

The main issue to decide in determining this claim is whether or not restricting short-term property rentals to a single dwelling on the host's primary property constitutes constructive expropriation. The two main elements of constructive expropriation set out in *CPR v Vancouver* are that all reasonable use of land must be restricted and the expropriating authority must receive a beneficial interest. The beneficial interest requirement has been interpretated by *Annapolis Group v Halifax* to refer to more than a property interest, and can extend to any interest accruing to the expropriating authority. Additionally, this case set out three factors for determining constructive expropriation, which are the nature of the government action, the historical use of the land, and what specific advantage accrues to the government. Applying these rules to the facts, we can first determine that the province did receive an interest here, their stated goal was to lower housing prices, and this action should achieve that end. The real issue here is whether this STRAA imposes strict enough rules to remove all reasonable use of the land. Addressing the nature of the act, this was certainly targeted against enterprises buying up land for the purpose of short-term rentals but does not target any business in particular. The petitioners may have grounds to argue this point, but targeting an industry is not out of the ordinary for legislation. Additionally, businesses were given a small amount of notice, as the act was announced in late 2023 and came into force in May 2024. However, it's definitely arguable that this is insufficient time for businesses to completely shift their rental models. Regarding the historical use of the land, clearly these buildings have been recently used for short-term rentals, but before the boom of this market were likely mostly long-term rentals. This is not a long-time practice being disrupted here, it's a fairly novel development. There are certainly examples of properties like the building in Victoria described as being marketed as short-term accommodation rentals, though I can't imagine any practical reasons which would make these studios unsuitable for long-term occupation. Finally, the advantage that accrues to the government does not benefit them directly, this legislation is simply a method of achieving their policy goals of reining in BC's rampant real estate market. Most damning of all for the petitioners case is the issue of whether all reasonable use of their land has been restricted. Given that most of these strata developments were likely once long-term rentals, there is nothing in the STRAA restricting these suites from being marketed as long-term rentals. While it may not be as profitable as short-term rentals, it's hard to argue that rental housing is not a profitable market in BC. This is not to say that the short-term landlords have no leg to stand on. Clearly, there has been harm created by eliminating the business models of enterprises solely devoted to short-term accommodations, like the example of Amala. However, this seems to be the exception to the rule, it's likely that most of those affected are in a situation closer to Angela Mason, whose profits will certainly be restricted, but still have the opportunity to pivot to a long-term rental model. Overall, the petitioners are unlikely to succeed in their claim for compensation, primarily because the STRAA does not remove all reasonable use of property, and even using the more strict American definition from *Lucas v South Carolina Coastal Council*, does not remove all profitable uses of the property.

The efforts of the petitioners to challenge the STRAA is an excellent example of property as preference satisfaction, which naturally chafes against any sort of restriction on the transfer and leasing of property. Thinking back to the former property systems of England and mechanisms like the strict settlement where property as propriety was the dominant way of thinking, these restrictions were much more prevalent. Over time, as society has begun to value the free and unfettered transfer of property more and more, it has turned against restrictions on the use and transfer of property that once defined its value. This has been motivated by many different factors, but one consistent driving force has been the economic theory of property. This idea states that we should limit restrictions on property rights to allow the most profitable methods of property distribution to rise to the surface, which will result in the most efficient use of property possible. This idea is also reflected in Coase's Theorem, which states that as long as transaction costs are low, property will naturally fall into the most efficient pattern of distribution. However, it is debatable if promoting profit-driven distribution will always result in the qualitatively best outcome. While undeniably profitable, short-term rentals have the nasty side effect of discarding the practical use of property in favour of upholding the economic uses of property. Another justification for property is the Personhood Theory, which states that free will is expressed through ownership of private property, and is a right granted to all peoples equally. While the STRAA limits the use of property for those who hold a high volume of property, it does not affect small-scale property owners in the same way. Additionally, it increases the degree of ownership granted to the average person living in BC, who is not a property owner but a renter. Arguably, the STRAA actually promotes property rights by replacing more limited short-time leases with long-term leases that grant more freedom to the renters of the province. If all these people have an equal right to own property, why is it that those who own the most property should be able to restrict the degree of ownership available to those who own little? Finally, this also partly ties into the utilitarian theory of property. While utilitarianism as it relates to property mainly takes a similar position to the economic theory, the core principles of utilitarianism certainly support actions that limit the benefits of the few in favour of a measurably greater benefit to the many. Going back to Honoré's standard incidents of ownership, what is effectively happening here is that the STRAA is pushing against the right to income in order to prevent it from stifling the right to use. While all of these property rights are certainly valuable, it is arguable that when it comes to the purpose of residential properties especially, it is hard to argue that we should be promoting their use as financial tools as opposed to their use as residences. After all, what else is a residential property supposed to be primarily used for other than stable housing? In conclusion, the STRAA's restrictions on property rights serve a wider purpose, restricting the rights of some property owners with the goal of opening the door for the exercise of free will of many more less fortunate property owners.

- Government didn't acquire a property interest, I missed the *Altius* case which held that an "advantage" under the *Annapolis* definition doesn't extend to policy goals
- Intention for the advantage definition was to cover cases where no direct property interest is transferred to the government, but they gain some use of the property
- Think about how the land in *Annapolis* was used as a park, or how the CPR right-of-way became a public thoroughfare
- In real life this case went to trial, but the judge dismissed it on the grounds that there was nothing to actually sue for, there's no constitutional protection for property rights
- Didn't rule on the issue of constructive expropriation
- To sue, they would have to be fined or somehow hurt by the government for violating the act
- Overall I did a pretty good job assessing the second element of the test, but I glossed over the first element much too quickly
- Make sure you cover both sides of the argument, I think I did a decent job of that
- Judges are encouraged to write addressing both parties, make sure they feel like their arguments were heard and seriously considered
- For the second question, I probably shouldn't have cut my mention that the STRAA limits but does not extinguish property rights
- Also didn't really explain what property as propriety means
- For the second question, try to implement all aspects of the question, and make sure your analysis was focused
- I think I drew on too many different arguments and didn't fully develop many of them
- Also don't need to really argue both sides for questions like this, or at least not to the degree that you would have to for the law question
- Overall the things I did bring up were relevant though
- 
### Class Prep
- One way to study is to look through the syllabus and see if I can do all the learning outcomes
- Also check the learning outcomes against what I have in my CAN
- For the essay question, there will usually be multiple different questions within the prompt, and you should try to address all these questions
- Can use this as a structure for your answer
- There's no right answer, especially if the question asks for your opinion, just provide a convincing argument for whatever your position may be
- Often, the question will be asking you to engage with material from a specific part of the course
- Make sure your answer reflects this, if they're asking about what is property, don't give an answer based on the justifications for property
- Don't be trying to shoehorn in information that doesn't match the question
- Papers are graded anonymously, don't put in any identifying information
### Office Hours
- Ask if we should address subissues/subquestions in any particular order
- Ask if we're expected to be able to cite the text of statutes

### 2023 Practice Exam
- Adams v Victoria is going to be relevant

First, explain why the definition is contested and why it's important
Second, explain what the government is trying to balance, and assess the outcome

This definition is contested and consequential because it touches on the issue of how homeless people should be allowed to use public places, a matter that is quite literally life or death for a portion of the population. As the Union of BC Municipalities points out, it's a given that there is a significant mismatch between the homeless population and the availability of shelter spaces. Combining this with the fact that homeless people do not have access to private real property, their only remaining option is to perform the actions that most people would have done in private on public property instead. This is the precise argument advanced by Jeremy Waldron in *Homelessness and the Issue of Freedom*, that we must grapple with the problem of homeless people existing in public for as long as we fail to provide them with private shelter. This would not be an issue if the political climate was tolerant towards large public populations of homeless people, but the fact that the Union mentions permanent encampments as an issue is telling of the fact that the climate does not allow this. This hostile attitude towards homeless people living in public is challenged by the proposed amendment because it would make removing these large encampments difficult or impossible if more shelter spaces meeting the bylaw's definitions are not constructed, as costly and time-consuming process. The City of Victoria faced precisely this issue in the case *Victoria v Adams*, where an injunction issued by the city against a homeless encampment was ruled to be unconstitutional as it violated the right to life protected under the Charter. The issue here was that there were not enough shelter beds to accommodate the city's homeless population, and in order to preserve their lives, the homeless population needed to construct temporary shelters. This proposed bylaw would make explicit the argument made by the defence in this case without having to rely on the *Charter*, preventing injunctions against encampments unless sufficient shelter is provided. Wood, Flynn and Van Wagner likely support this effort, but take issue with the insufficient definition of shelter. What is provided here is not sufficient to actually meet the right to life, as even if these requirements were met, notable shortcomings would still exist. These are valid concerns, especially the lack of storage space for possessions which is a significant concern of homeless people who face constant dispossession. 

The fundamental tension at play here is between the desire of homeless people to be able to carry out their lives in public without the interference of the state, and the desire of the wider population to have public spaces free of homeless people, whom they view as nuisances. This latter position is best described by Ellickson in *Controlling Chronic Misconduct in City Spaces* who claims that minor annoyances such as panhandling should be limited to certain areas of cities in order to encourage the use of public spaces. He also goes on to state the importance of these public spaces, viewing them as essential to democratic society. By providing this arguably insufficient definition of alternative shelter, the government attempts to satisfy both the homeless people who seek freedom from interference while maintaining a potential way to keep them off the streets as long as their right to life is preserved. While this appears to not satisfy either party, I believe this is at least somewhat close to an appropriate solution. I find Waldron's argument that it is unconscionable to ignore the plight of homeless people in favour of the wider public convincing, and as such I believe if the only option available to these people is to live in public, they should be allowed to do so on humanitarian grounds. Any "solution" to this problem should be focused on improving the position of these people, not forcing them into hiding from authorities. While making public spaces available and comfortable to all is certainty important, we should not be doing this at the cost of people's lives, especially when solutions like expanded public housing projects exist. Improving the position of homeless people seems to be what this proposed amendment seeks to do, and while I do agree these requirements fall short of the ideal solution, I'm not convinced that this would weaken existing legal protections. Considering the notable lack of alternative shelter at present, any legislation that encourages further investment in shelters, and ideally provides funding for these shelters, should be encouraged. If local governments were able to mobilize their resources to construct additional shelters meeting these requirements in order to remove homeless settlements, the outcome would not be ideal, but at least we would have substantially stronger shelter infrastructure. Given the fact that public opinion seems to be so heavily weighed in the favour of eliminating homeless populations through violent displacement, any concession in the favour of these populations should be considered a valid effort to strike a balance between the needs of the homeless and the broader public.

- Finders issue, Rocky was about to throw it out, shows intention to abandon
- Seemed to be lost, not intentionally placed or fized to the basement
- All of Loretta's possession belong to Sam, but he did not claim the box
- Box was opened while Pepper was under Rocky's employment
- Sam, Martha, Maxwell, Pepper, and Rocky are making claims

Sam: Likely has the strongest claim, as they legally own all of Loretta's personal property, presumably including the locked box. Only issue is whether the box was abandoned, which is assessed on a subjective test.

Martha: Likely has the weakest claim, has a future right to the house and thus a future version of whatever Maxwell has

Maxwell: Relatively weak claim, he owned the property the box was found on, but all possessions in the house were left to Sam, and there's no evidence suggesting the box was a fixture

Pepper: Likely has a relatively strong claim, they were the finder and have a *prima facie* right to the box

Rocky: Roughly equal claim to Pepper, holds the lease to the property, but has the same issue as Maxwell. Also may a vicarious right to the money because it was opened while Pepper was working at his restaurant. Strength of this claim will depend on whether the "finding" happened when the box was first discovered, or when it was opened

Sam likely has the strongest claim, as they are the legal owner of the box. The original owner of the box was presumably Loretta, as it was found in her former residence and the bills are dated to the period where Loretta was the owner of the property. In Loretta's will she left all the contents of the house, presumably including the box, to Sam. The one issue with Sam's claim is that it can be argued that Sam abandoned the box when he took some of contents of the house and stated that he "was not interested in anything else". However, as demonstrated in *Wicks Estate v Harnett*, at common law the test for abandonment is based on subjective intent. It would be trivial for Sam to claim that his subjective intent was to maintain possession of all the contents of the house, including the locked box. Therefore, he would be considered the original owner of the box and have a superior right over all other claimants.

Besides Sam, Rocky and Pepper have the second and third strongest claims, although which one of the two has the superior claim is currently unclear. Pepper was the first individual to find the box after it has been seemingly abandoned, and was also the first individual to discover it contained money. This gives Pepper a presumption of ownership that can only be displaced by proving a superior right to the lost property, as established in *Trachuk v Olinek*. As we will see, Sam is likely to be the only individual here with a superior right to the box. Additionally, Pepper can also argue that they asserted an intent to possess the box as they prevented Rocky from throwing it out when it was first discovered. 

Rocky holds the lease to the property that the box was found on, which would give him the presumption of ownership if the box was in some way attached to the property or intentionally placed there. There seems to be no evidence that the box was intentionally placed or attached, and therefore this does not give him any right to the box, which is supported by *Parker v British Airways*. Additionally, it cannot be argued that Rocky's lease included the contents of the house, as according to Loretta's will, those contents belonged to Sam and could not be legally transferred by Maxwell. However, Pepper opened the box while he was actively working under Rocky at his restaurant, meaning that Rocky may have a right to the contents of the box as they were found during the course of employment by one of his employees. Determining this would depend on a crucial detail, that being whether the initial discovery of the box by Pepper during the move was the moment of finding, or if the opening of the box was the moment of finding. It's not clear how the court would rule on this detail, but if the opening of the box was the moment of finding, then Rocky would have a right superior to Pepper. Otherwise, Rocky would not have a superior right to Pepper, but would still have a better claim than the remaining two individuals.

Maxwell has the fourth strongest claim, based on the fact that he owns the life estate to the property. Similar to Rocky's case, Maxwell may have had a right to the box if it was intentionally placed or attached to the home. However, even in this case his right would be inferior to Rocky's right, as he had demised his right to the property by leasing it to Rocky at both the time the box was found, and when it was opened.

Martha has the weakest claim, even though she holds a larger estate compared to Maxwell. This is because she currently only holds a remainder in the property, while Maxwell actively holds the life estate. She would have had the same potential right as Maxwell and Rocky in the event that the property was never leased to Rocky and if Maxwell had died before the box was found, transforming the remainder interest into an active one.
### Learning Outcomes

### 2022 Practice Exam
- skip question 1 
- fixtures issue for sure
- ok maybe covenants running with the land too
- This is basically a copy of scott v filipovic
- Case depends on whether pepper could have retrieved the plants and buildings
- Pepper probably does have action for conversion, this is different

Pepper likely does have action in conversion regarding the blueberry plants and the office, but may not have action regarding the house and irrigation system. This is mainly due to the fact that Pepper has a limited right through Rocky to retrieve the plants and infrastructure that they placed on the property. The first matter to address here is the striking similarity between these facts and those of *Scott v Filipovic*, which also involved a suit for conversion after a blueberry farm was seized by a landlord after a breach of the lease agreement. However, there are a few key details distinguishing the present case from *Scott v Filipovic*. First, this case involves more than just blueberry plants being seized, Pepper also installed an irrigation system, as well as an office and accommodation for workers. Crucially, the main difference between the cases involves the initial sale of the farm. In *Scott v Filipovic*, the plaintiffs voided their lease agreement early on by transferring the lease to one of their employees. However, it appears that in this case, Pepper ended their lease prematurely when selling the farm, and the new tenant, Rocky, signed a new lease with the landlord. The only issue here came when Rocky attempted to transfer the lease to Pepper when Pepper bought the business back. It seems clear that when Pepper sold Rocky the farm, they were able to fully transfer all ownership to Rocky. However, because the second transfer attempted to transfer the lease, something the terms of the lease do not allow, a problem arises. While Rocky would be able to transfer all other elements of the business to Pepper, they cannot transfer the land itself, as this is blocked by the lease agreement. 

This raises the issue of what of Pepper's alleged property was considered a fixture, and thus could not be transferred in this deal. We know from *La Salle Recreations v Canadian Camdex Investments* that there is a two part test for distinguishing fixtures from chattel. First, we must check whether the object in question is "attached" to the land. If it is, this creates a rebuttable presumption that the object is a fixture, and vice versa of it is not attached. Second, we consider whether objectively speaking, the object was attached for the better use of the land, or the better use of the object. Applying this test to the facts, we can observe that the blueberry bushes, irrigation system, office building, and manufactured house are all in some way attached to the land. The house seems to be the most firmly attached, followed by the blueberry bushes, the irrigation system, and the office. Starting with the house, given the strength of the attachment it is likely that this will be considered a fixture. While it could be argued that the house would be too unstable if not attached to the land and therefore is attached for the better use of the house, it seems more convincing to argue that the house was attached to provide accommodation for workers to gain more benefit from the land. Next, it appears that the blueberries will likely be considered chattel. While *Scott v Filipovic* never made a definitive statement on whether the plants are chattel, it seems likely. First of all, Pepper always intended to move or sell the bushes when moving out, and although this is an objective test, not a subjective one, the fact that there is an active market for blueberry plants is an indication that these bushes were planted for the better use of the bushes. Next, the irrigation system is likely to be considered a fixture. Although it is fairly lightly attached, the fact that the irrigation system was installed to make the land more productive strongly indicates that the purpose for the attachment was for the benefit of the land. Finally, the office building is likely to be considered chattel. While this may at first seem like a similar case to the house, consider how the office building is attached. It's actually not affixed to the ground at all, and is only "attached" by its electrical and phone lines. While the office was likely brought to the property to benefit the farm, the reason for the attachment was purely to augment the use of the office, not to benefit the land.

Now that we have established that Pepper would retain ownership of the blueberry bushes and the office, would they even have the right to retrieve them? After all, in the *Scott v Filipovic* case, the court ruled for the defendant as the plaintiffs waived their right to retrieve the blueberry bushes by not doing it immediately after they voided the lease. But in this case, the landlord hasn't even given Pepper the opportunity to retrieve their chattel after the lease was voided, which presumably only happened as recently as September 2022. While Pepper isn't the current tenant, considering they are the legal owner of the bushes and office, they should have the right to retrieve their property promptly after the end of the lease, and thus would also have grounds to sue for conversion

Part 1

This statement is definitely apt when it comes to the European understanding of property, but may begin to fall short out of context. Starting with the benefits of this approach, this statement is technically correct, when you "own" something, what you actually get is the ability to exclude others from using that object, not necessarily just the object itself. We can see this demonstrated in the five points of agreement between theories of property outlined by Merrill in *Property and the Right to Exclude*, especially the point that property is the rights of individuals with respect to resources. Once we begin to understand property as not a system of distributing goods, but distributing rights to those goods, things begin to make a lot more sense. While I mentioned earlier that property is the ability to exclude others, this is just one view of the rights that come with property ownership. Multi-variable Essentialists like Tony Honoré list off many more property rights including the right to sell, transfer, and use property. We can even see this phenomenon outside of just private property, common property is also defined by the rights that it grants, namely that everyone has the right to use public property, meaning no one else can restrict their use of the property as long as they are complying with the rules governing that property.

However, one major issue with this conception of property is that it only extends to the rules governing relationships between people, and not the rules governing relationships between people and the things themselves. This distinction is especially notable when examining Indigenous property law, which tends to place a strong emphasis on relationships between individuals and the land, and the responsibilities emerging from these relationships. A great example of this is the Magpie River in Quebec, which is considered its own legal person and has its own rights and freedoms that need to be respected by those living around it like the right to live, exist and flow, and be free from pollution. While this is a rare example of property relationships between human and non-human entities in Canadian law, this is fairly common in Indigenous legal traditions. While Blackstone and Honoré certainly do a good job of explaining how private property is owned and respected between people, there are certain things they cannot account for. For example, traditional theories of property have no way to explain Hul'qumi'num property rights, which do not originate from any kind of transfer or sale, not even first possession. Rather, different family groups within the nation base their land rights on family ties to the land, which is a physical embodiment of their "First Ancestors" who descended from the sky long ago and eventually became part of the land itself. This is yet another example of property rights that emerge not from relationships between people, but relationships between people and the land.

Overall, while this statement may be useful in explaining to someone just learning about European property law how "ownership" of private property is connected to rights, it is reductive in the sense that it suggests that all property rights relate only to relationships between people with respect to things, not to relationships between people and the things themselves.

### 2020 Practice Exam
- I'm skipping the essay question
- Seems to be an indirect expropriation question, and an airspace question
- For Pepper, they need to establish trespass, or perhaps a nuisance
- Will have to pass the reasonable use test from *Didow*
- Rigby needs to establish indirect expropriation, needs to meet the *Annapolis* modified *CPR* test

Pepper will likely not be able to stop the Translink gondola, and likely has no legal basis for compensation either. Rigby, on the other hand may have a right to compensation. Starting with Pepper, to get an injunction or damages from Translink, they will likely need to establish cause of action for nuisance or trespass on their property. In terms of property law issues, the most important thing to consider is whether the gondola could be considered as trespassing on Pepper's property. To determine this, we will have to evaluate the question of at what height entering airspace over private property is a trespass. The rule here is set out in *Manitoba v Air Canada*, and states that the upper limit where trespass can be established is where the landowner can reasonably use the land. Given that Pepper lives in a residential neighbourhood in Burnaby, and cannot make his house larger than two storeys (10 m), we know that the gondola cars will be 40 meters above the limit Pepper can legally build to. This should be more than enough room to put the gondola cars safely out of any space Pepper could reasonably make use of. Because of this, Pepper's only option is to seek an injunction or damages for nuisance, which would likely fail as well given the cars seem fairly quiet and loss of property value or a diminished view do not amount to a nuisance under tort law.

For Rigby to get compensation for their rooftop lease, they will need to establish that the building of the gondola over their rented rooftop constituted constructive expropriation. The test for this comes from *Annapolis Group v Halifax*, and is a modified version of the *CPR v City of Vancouver* test. This test has two components, first the expropriating authority must receive some kind of benefit, and second, all reasonable use of the land must be extinguished. Starting with the benefit requirement, this is sometimes difficult to establish. Beginning with *Annapolis*, this requirement was expanded to include any kind of benefit, not just a property interest. It certainly seems that the city got a benefit here, they have effectively a right-of-way to build a gondola over the building Rigby was leasing. However, let's look a little closer and examine if the city is actually getting anything they didn't already have. Based on the precedent of *Lacroix v The Queen*, we know that any point in airspace beyond what the property owner can reasonably use is public property. However, although Rigby can't legally build high enough to block the gondola, the fact that phone companies are hesitant to build within 10 meters of the gondola shows that this could still be considered space they can reasonably use, albeit only for transmitting signals. If the courts accept this argument, Translink could be considered to actually be taking up a bit of Rigby's airspace. Overall, this suggests that Translink may actually have gained a right-of-way without Rigby's permission, which would certainly qualify as a benefit or advantage.

Moving on to the second requirement, we need to examine whether all reasonable uses of Rigby's rooftop lease have been extinguished. To help determine this, *Annapolis* also set out three additional factors to consider. First, what was the government action like? In this case the action does seem quite targeted, Rigby's rooftop lease is the only commercial property affected by this proposed gondola route, which they only knew about when the plans were released. Second, how was the land used currently and historically? This is a bit trickier to determine, but it seems that building cell towers above the construction limit in commercial areas is pretty common, and Rigby seems to have made a whole business out of it. Finally, what advantage did the government get, and are they using the land? As mentioned earlier, it's arguable that Translink is basically running their gondola through a portion of Rigby's property without permission. Regarding the potential uses of the rooftop lease, it certainly seems that all profitable uses have been extinguished. Even if Rigby builds the cell tower, it seems that no cell companies will be willing to buy in, making the towers both unprofitable, but also practically useless. Even if Rigby wanted to build a cell tower anyway, there's no way they could make use of it without an existing cell network, it would just be a hunk of metal sitting on the roof. It's pretty difficult to imagine what else a rooftop lease in an industrial district could be used for, other than building communications equipment that could potentially be interfered with by the gondola overhead. Therefore, in addition to the evidence from the previous three factors, Rigby also has a good case to argue that all reasonable private use of their land has been extinguished. Overall, the evidence suggests that Rigby has a good case for constructive expropriation, and would likely be able to get compensation from Translink, especially if they are able to establish that the gondola is trespassing on their airspace.